.TH FAR 1 "" "Version 4.0"

.SH NAMES

farsplit, farinfo, farfilter, farcompilestrings, farprintstrings 
- finite-state machine archive utilities
.PP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B farsplit
[ -n
.I fieldsize
]
[ -r
.I root
]
[ -x
.I ext
]
[
.I far
]
.PP
.B farinfo
[ -vp ]
{
.I far
]
.PP
.B farfilter
.I command
[
.I far
]
.PP
.B farcompilestrings
[ -i
.I symbols
] 
[ -u
.I unknown_symbol
] 
[ -f \fIfsmclass\fR ]
[ -s \fIsemiring\fR ]
[
.I file 
]
.PP
.B farprintstrings
[ -i
.I symbols
] 
[ -o
.I symbols
] 
[ -n
.I nbest
] 
[ -chp12 ]
[
.I far
]
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
These commands manipulate 
.I weighted finite-state machines archives (FARs).
A FAR archive is simply the concatentation of 
the file representation of one or more finite-state machines.
The FAR representation
is convenient for dealing with large numbers of related FSMs (see
fsmintro(1) for an introduction to the (non-archive) FSM utilities and
data representations).  An example from speech recognition is storing
the FSM representation of speech transcriptions or segmentations or
recognition lattices of multiple utterances from one or more speakers
in a single FAR rather than in a directory full of indiviual FSM
files. A FAR archive can be created from individual binary FSM files
(see fsm(1)) by using (for example) the UNIX command
.I cat.
.PP
.I farsplit
splits a FAR archive into its component FSMs. They are
named, by default, 0001.fsm, 0002.fsm, etc. With the
\fI-x\fR option, the extension can changed. With
the \fI-r\fR option, a 'root' name can be prepended.
With the \fI-n\fR option, the numeric field size
can changed from the default of 4.
.PP
.I farinfo
sends to standard output the following information about a FAR
archive -- the number of acceptors, the number of transducers, the
total number of states and the total number of transitions represented by the FSMS in the archive. With the \fI-v\fR flag, similar information per FSM is provided.
With the \fI-p\fR flag, this information is sent instead to standard error
and a copy of the input is sent to standard output.
.PP
For each FSM in the archive,
.I farfilter
invokes 
.I command
and sends that FSM to the command's standard input. This makes it easy to
apply the (non-archive) FSM utilities to a FAR archive.
For example,
.PP
\f(CW farfilter "fsmproject -2 | fsmrmepsilon" <fst.far >fsa.far
.PP
converts an archived collection of transducers to epsilon-free acceptors.
.PP
.I farcompilestrings
converts each line of text in
.I file
to a single-path FSM; one transition is created in sequence for each label on the line.
By default, these labels are integers. With the \fI-i\fR option, textual
names specified by the
.I symbols
file are used (see fsm(5)).
By default, if a symbol is encountered in the input text that is missing
from the symbols file, then a fatal error is reported. 
However with the \fI-u\fR option,  \fIunknown_symbol\fR (which
must be present in the symbols file) is instead substituted for any missing symbols.
The \fI-f\fR option
specifies the FSM representation class (see \fIfsmclass(3)\fR);
by default, it is
.I FSMBasicClass.
The \fI-s\fR option
specifies the cost semiring (see \fIfsmcost(3)\fR);
by default, it is
.I SMRTropical.
The resulting FSMs are returned as a FAR archive on standard output.
.PP
.I farprintstrings 
prints paths in the FAR archive. By default, it
prints nothing. With the -1 option, it sends to standard output the
input labels along the best (lowest cost) path in each FSM in the
archive. Each path is a single line and the transition labels are printed in
sequence as textual integers separated by spaces. 
With the \fI-i\fR option, textual names specified by the
.I symbols
file are used. The \fI-2\fR and \fI-o\fR options can be used to
print the output labels instead or as well. The \fI-c\fR appends
the path's cost to each line; it is separated from the path labels
by a tab. The \fI-n\fR option
can be used to print the
.I nbest 
paths per FSM rather than just the 1-best. In this case, each path
is printed on a separate line and a blank line is printed at the end of 
each FSM's output for clarity. With the \fI-u\FR option, the nbest
.I unique 
paths per FSM are printed (with \fI-n\fR).
The \fI-h\fR option prints a one line descriptive header prior to each 
FSM's output. The \fI-p\fR option sends the  above output 
instead to standard error and copies the input FAR archive to standard output. 
This allows 
.I fsmprintstrings 
to be conveniently used in pipelines.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PD 0
.TP 3.5i
.I far(3)
FSM archive C routines.
.TP 3.5i
.I fsmintro(1)
Intro. to the FSM programs and library.
.TP 3.5i
.I http://www.research.att.com/sw/tools/fsm
FSM home page -- software, documentation and references.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 3.5i
.I /n/lvr/linux/bin/fsm-4
Distribution binaries.
.TP 3.5i
.I /n/lvr/linux/src/cmd/fsm/fsm-4
Distribution sources.
.PP
.SH AUTHORS
Cyril Allauzen (allauzen@research.att.com)
.br
Mehryar Mohri (mohri@research.att.com)
.br
Fernando Pereira (pereira@cis.upenn.edu)
.br
Michael Riley (riley@research.att.com)
.PP
\fBCopyright (C) 1998-2003 AT&T Corp. All rights reserved.
